# Factor 5 Herbal Supplement
 
 
Herbal supplements (HSs) are used to treat a variety of diseases and ailments. Individuals with chronic diseases are at a higher risk of having adverse events and drug interactions from the use of HSs.
 
A cross-sectional study was conducted among patients with chronic diseases between February and June 2019. Face-to-face interviews were conducted at various out-patient clinics in different hospitals. Patients diagnosed with chronic diseases were included in the study. Data were analyzed by descriptive, comparative, and inferential statistics using SAS ver. 9.4.
 
**DOWNLOAD ✯✯✯ [https://tinurll.com/2A0TcR](https://tinurll.com/2A0TcR)**


 
The results of this study showed that HSs usage was high among patients with chronic diseases in Saudi Arabia. Concurrent usage of HSs with drugs should be well-discussed with healthcare providers to avoid potential adverse events or drug interactions especially among patients with chronic diseases.
 
**Copyright:** 2024 Albassam et al. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
 
Patients suffering from chronic diseases are more likely to use HSs than the general population though general public do use HSs. Alghamdi et al., in 2018 found that 68% of the chronic disease sufferers used HSs in Saudi Arabia [5]. Another study done by Alsanad et al., in 2018 among Saudi patients with diabetes mellitus reported that the prevalence of CAM users was around 32% where most of the patients used honey, black seeds (Nigella sativa), fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum), and myrrh (Commiphora myrrha) [6]. Another study found that 32% of the chronic liver patients also used HSs [7]. In addition, Al Essa et al., in 2019 found that among Saudi patients with neurological disorders, 28% had used HSs [8]. Such widespread use of HSs also increases the risk of adverse events and drug interactions and making it imperative that healthcare providers should better understand the prevalence of HSs use and inquire and counsel their patients about the potential side effects, drug interactions or adverse events of the HSs if they are taken with pharmacological agents.
 
In contrast, use of HSs with therapeutic agents (drugs) could be beneficial too if they are used appropriately and precisely. Many patients believe that HSs are safe and harmless by virtue of being natural. However, several clinical evidences have demonstrated that not all HSs are safer and may cause adverse events especially when they are used along with prescribed medications among chronic disease patients [11, 12]. Hence, it is important to determine the exact beliefs, awareness, use, and factors associated with herbal supplements usage among patients with chronic diseases. No previous study has examined the beliefs, awareness, use, and factors associated with HSs usage among patients with chronic diseases in Alkharj. Thus, the present study aimed to determine the beliefs, awareness, use, and factors associated with HSs usage among patients with chronic diseases in Alkharj, Saudi Arabia.
 
Convenient sampling technique was used to obtain the required sample size. A face-to-face interview in outpatient clinics at three tertiary hospitals and two primary care facilities were conducted. A total of 157 participants were included from tertiary care hospital 1, 135 from hospital 2, 107 from hospital 3, and 81 from primary care setup 1 and 53 from setup 2. These hospitals and primary care facilities are located in Alkharj, Saudi Arabia.

Healthcare providers can play a crucial role in informing patients about the proper use of HSs and in preventing potential adverse events among them. During patient counselling, HSs type and usage pattern should be reviewed and discussed with patients to minimize possible side effects and adverse consequences. However, the majority of the patients in our study neither consult their healthcare providers before taking HSs (>78%) nor discuss their usage pattern with them (>81.1%). On the other hand, more than 89% of the studied patients stated that their healthcare providers also did not ask or provide them any recommendations about any HSs use or avoidance. In agreement with our findings, 62% of diabetes patients in another study also did not inform their healthcare providers about any herbs they used in conjunction with their medicine, and 64% reported that their healthcare providers did not inquire about their HSs usage too [27]. In another study from the southern part of Saudi Arabia, 88.7% of patients with chronic illnesses reported that they did not discuss their use of herbal remedies with their doctors, and more than 90% said that their doctors also did not inquire about their use of herbal remedies [5]. Similar findings were reported from another country, where more than 77% of the patients with chronic conditions reported that they had not talked to their doctor about using herbal remedies [25]. Our study reports are also in accordance to another study conducted in Turkey, where 42% of elderly patients failed to disclose their use of herbal products to their doctors, but over 40% did so when questioned [24]. Perhaps, one of the most effective methods for addressing this problem could be that healthcare providers should inquire from their patients about their usage of HSs to avoid potential herbal interactions or possible adverse events.
 
The results of this study reported that ginger, mint (peppermint), and cumin were the most frequent HSs used among the studied patients suffering from chronic diseases. Ginger has been traditionally used to treat various ailments, including nausea, motion sickness, vomiting, and arthritis [30]. Mint has a long history of being used as a digestive aid due to its antispasmodic properties. Mint oil has also been used from decades to treat irritable bowel syndrome and non-ulcer dyspepsia. Moreover, many studies reported that people often inhale steam of mint leaves to treat cough and upper-respiratory tract problem [31, 32]. On the other hand, cumin has also been used to treat colic, diarrhea, bloating, and bowel spasms [33]. Several studies have reported a similar pattern of use of various HSs like ginger, mint, and cumin [34, 35]. It is recommended that healthcare providers gain more medical insight about HS by starting with the commonly consumed HS to facilitate their discussion with their patients.
 
Various factors (after adjusting confounders) were found to be associated with the use of HSs among the studied cohort of patients suffering from chronic diseases. First pure factor was gender, which showed a statistically significant association (p = 0.0107) regarding the use of HSs among the studied patients, whereby female patients were found to use more HSs than the male patients with the odds of 0.328. Second factor (without confounders) was the presence of chronic diseases among the studied patients. The usage of HSs was significantly increased among the patients with multiple chronic diseases. Furthermore, HSs use was significantly observed more among patients with hyperlipemia, than heart disease, and asthma patients, with the odds of 2.818. Previous studies have also reported similar findings that females tend to use more HSs than males [36, 37], and patients with chronic diseases are among the substantial and frequent users of HSs [38]. More attention is needed for these specific populations to avoid any unwanted adverse effects.
 
The findings of this study give baseline data that may be used to develop various training programs and design interventions for healthcare providers for better counselling of the HSs users to avoid unwanted adverse events and drug interactions.
 
The current study determined beliefs, awareness, use, and factors associated with herbal supplements usage among patients with chronic diseases in Saudi Arabia. More than half of the studied patients had used at least one HS in this study. The majority of patients did not tell their healthcare providers about their HSs use, and the majority of healthcare providers also did not inquire about it. Gender, number of chronic diseases, and hyperlipidemia were the pure factors of HSs use among the studied patients. Patients should be urged to disclose their usage of HSs to the healthcare providers to have an optimized healthcare.
 
Our 24/7 cancer helpline provides information and answers for people dealing with cancer. We can connect you with trained cancer information specialists who will answer questions about a cancer diagnosis and provide guidance and a compassionate ear.
 
Our highly trained specialists are available 24/7 via phone and on weekdays can assist through online chat. We connect patients, caregivers, and family members with essential services and resources at every step of their cancer journey. Ask us how you can get involved and support the fight against cancer. Some of the topics we can assist with include:
 
Chemicals called aromatic amines, such as benzidine and beta-naphthylamine, which are sometimes used in the dye industry, can cause bladder cancer. Workers in other industries that use certain organic chemicals also may have a higher risk of bladder cancer.
 
Other workers with an increased risk of developing bladder cancer include painters, machinists, printers, firefighters, hairdressers (probably because of heavy exposure to hair dyes), and truck drivers (likely because of exposure to diesel fumes).
 
Some research has suggested that the use of the diabetes medicine **pioglitazone**might be linked with an increased risk of bladder cancer. The risk seems to get higher when higher doses are used.
 
Dietary supplements containing **aristolochic acid** (mainly in herbs from the Aristolochia family) have been linked with an increased risk of urothelial cancers, including bladder cancer.
 
Arsenic in drinking water has been linked with a higher risk of bladder cancer in some parts of the world. The chance of being exposed to arsenic depends on where you live and whether you get your water from a well or from a public water system that meets the standards for low arsenic content. For most Americans, drinking water isn't a major source of arsenic.
 a2f82b0cb4
 
